















































 

 

Course number Course Title Term 

COMP 445 Data Communication & Computer Networks Winter 2023 

 

Course Instructor Office E-Mail Office Hours 

Dr. Sandra 

Céspedes 
(Coordinator) 

ER 1221 sandra.cespedes@concordia.ca Thursday 11:00 AM – 12:00 
PM or by appointment 

Dr. Abdelhak 
Bentaleb 

ER 1223 abdelhak.bentaleb@concordia.ca Wednesday 3:30 PM – 4:30 
PM or by appointment 

 
 

CLASS, LAB AND TUTORIAL SCHEDULE 

Section Day Time   Location  Instructor  E-mail 

M  MoWe 
1:15 pm 
– 2:30 
pm 

H 1070 
SGW 

Dr. Abdelhak 
Bentaleb 
 

abdelhak.bentaleb@concordia.ca 
 

W 
Tu 
Th 

1:15 pm 
– 2:30 
pm 

EV 
2.260 
SGW 

Dr. Sandra 
Céspedes 

sandra.cespedes@concordia.ca 
 

 
 

Labs     E-Mail Lab Start Date 

To be announced. Please check Moodle for full 
details 

 Week 3 

 

COURSE CALENDAR DESCRIPTION 

Network architectures: OSI and Internet models. Link layer: error detection, multiple access 
protocols, addressing. Local area networks: Ethernet, ATM, switches and hubs. Network layer: 
forwarding and routing, IP, routing algorithms, multicast. Transport layer: connectionless and 
connection‑oriented transport, reliable data transport, congestion control, QoS, UDP and TCP. 
Application layer: DNS, the web and http, file transfer, and email. Introduction to network security, 
multimedia protocols and wireless networking. 

 

PREREQUISITES 

COMP 346 
 

 

TEXTBOOK AND ADDITIONAL COURSE MATERIALS 

• Required textbook(s):  



 

Computer Networking; A Top-Down Approach by Jim Kurose and Keith Ross, Pearson 
Higher Education, 8th Edition, 2020. ISBN-13: 9780135928615.  

*Notes:  

− 7th Edition. ISBN-13: 978-0-13-359414-0, ISBN-10: 0-13-359414-9. is also okay.  

− Other references may be needed/used. 

 

• Instructor’s lecture notes: will be posted in Moodle course management site 

 
 
 

GRADING POLICY 

Evaluation Tool Weight 

Midterm 20% 

Final 50% 

Lab assignments 20% 

Theoretical assignment 10% 

Total 100% 

Passing Criteria: 

Students must pass the mid-term and the final exam to pass the course. There is no substitution for a 
missed exam. 

Important Dates 

• Theoretical assignment 1 January 27th, 2023 

• Theoretical assignment 2 February 17th, 2023 

• Theoretical assignment 3 March 17th, 2023 

• Theoretical assignment 4 April 7th, 2023 

• Lab assignment 1 February 10th, 2023  

• Lab assignment 2 March 24th, 2023  

• Lab assignment 3 April 14th, 2023 

• The midterm is scheduled on February 22th, 2023, starting at 1:15 PM (section W) and 
February 23th, 2023 starting at 1:15 PM (section M). 

• The final will be a three-hour examination during the examination period on a date to be 
announced later 

 

 
 

GRADUATE ATTRIBUTES: SKILLS TO LEARN AND/OR UTILIZE  

Graduate Attribute Indicators 



 

Knowledge base for engineering: Knowledge of 
network architectures: OSI and Internet models. Link 
layer: error detection, multiple access protocols, 
addressing. Local area networks: Ethernet, ATM, 
switches, and hubs. Network layer: forwarding and 
routing, IP, routing algorithms, multicast. Transport 
layer: connectionless and connection‑oriented 
transport, reliable data transport, congestion control, 
QoS, UDP and TCP. Application layer: DNS, the web 
and http, file transfer, and email. Introduction to 
network security, multimedia protocols and wireless 
networking. 

1.3: Knowledge-base in a specific domain. 

Problem analysis: Use mathematical modeling to 
analyze networking metrics such as bandwidth, 
throughput, delay, etc 

2.2: Modeling. 

Design: Develop simple system software applications 
related to the operation of computer networks, such as 
protocols, routing, security, etc. 

4.1: Problem identification and 
information gathering. 

4.3: Architectural and detailed design 

4.4: Implementation and validation 

Use of Engineering Tools: Make educated choices as 
to what data structures and algorithms to use to solve 
problems following their respective strengths and 
constraints 

5.1: Ability to use appropriate tools, 
techniques, and resources. 

 
 
 

COURSE LEARNING OUTCOMES (CLOS) 
By the end of this course students will be able to: 
 

Course Learning Outcome Relationship to Graduate Attributes 

A. Clearly explain the major components of a computer 

network and the Internet 

➢ Knowledge base for engineering 

B. Explain the functions and protocols involved in the 

different layers of the OSI model and the TCP/IP 

stack 

➢ Knowledge base for engineering 
 

C. Describe the operation of networking protocols and 

perform basic performance analysis 

➢ Knowledge base for engineering 
➢ Problem analysis 

D. Develop network-based applications and networking 

protocols 

➢ Problem analysis 
➢ Design 
➢ Use of Engineering Tools 

E. Identify recent advances in modern networking, 

mobile networks, and security 

➢ Knowledge base for engineering 
 

 



 

 

TENTATIVE COURSE OUTLINE 

Topics Week 

Outline, Introduction 1 

Introduction, Application Layer 2 

Application Layer 3 

Application Layer, Transport Layer 4 

Transport Layer 5 

Transport Layer, Recap 6 

Midterm, Data plane 7 

Data plane, Control plane 8 

Control plane 9 

Control plane, Link Layer 10 

Link Layer 11 

Link Layer, Wireless Networks 12 

Wireless Networks, Security 13 

 
 
 

Other Notes 

Lab Assignments: This course has a scheduled laboratory of two hours per week. There will be a total 
of three (3) lab assignments. Students must submit and pass at least two (2) of the three (3) assignments 
to pass the course. It is allowed to work individually or in a team of a maximum of two people. A team 
will submit only one copy of the assignment by one of the members. Please see the submission format 
below. 

A demo for about 10 minutes will take place with the marker. All group members must attend the 
demo and explain their work to the marker. Different marks may be assigned to teammates based on 
this demo. The schedule of the demos will be determined and announced by the markers, and students 
must contact the marker to reserve their time slot.   

Demos are mandatory. The marking is subject to the following rules: 



 

• If you fail your demo appointment, a zero mark is assigned regardless of your submission 

• If you book a demo appointment and do not show up (for whatever reason), you will be allowed 
to reschedule a second demo with a grading penalty of 50% 

• Failing to demo at the second appointment will result in zero marks, and no more chances will 
be given under any conditions 

 

Theoretical Assignments: There will be a total of four (4) theoretical assignments. The main purpose 
behind these assignments is to provide students with good preparation for the final. While discussion 
of the assigned problems among students is encouraged, each student is to solve and submit the 
assignments independently. For each theoretical assignment, we pick a random question to mark. 
Besides a correct answer for the selected question, the submission must be complete (i.e., all questions 
answered) to get full marks. Late assignments will not be accepted. 
 

 

Mid-term and final exams: In general, students will need to bring their own ENCS calculator to the 
exams. Both the mid-term and the final will be closed-book examinations. The final exam will cover 
material from the entire course, including lectures, textbook, and assignments. 

 

Grading: There is no standard relationship between percentages and the final letter grades. For 
reasons of fairness, we may choose to scale up/down the marks in a particular exam or assignment 
to ensure that all aspects of the course receive a fair weight. Before the final grades are assessed, 
any such "fine-tuning" will be made known to students. 

 

Assignments' submission format: All assignments will be published in Moodle (no hard copies 
will be distributed in class). Students will have to submit their assignments (one copy per group for 
the Lab assignments) using Moodle. Assignments uploaded to an incorrect folder in Moodle will 
not be marked, resulting in a zero mark. No resubmissions will be allowed. Submissions outside 
Moodle will not be processed.  

 
Format: The assignments need to be typed. Hand-written (or scanned) assignments will be rejected. 
All assignment-related submissions must be adequately archived in a ZIP file using the student(s) 
ID(s) and last name(s) as the file name. The submission itself must also contain the student(s) 
name(s) and student ID(s). Use "official" names only - no abbreviations or nicknames; capitalize the 
usual "last" name. 

Content Delivery, Materials, and Resources: Lectures will follow the standard term schedule. 
However, in the case of switching to an online delivery mode, the instructor will inform students 
about the methodology for content delivery and lecturing. The course materials will be published in 
Moodle, including class notes, assignments, important dates, announcements related to the class, 
and pointers to documents, among others. Course materials are for students’ personal use. personal 
use.  

 
In addition, the faculty web pages have a wealth of information about our computer systems and 
software, which includes simple user guides and answers to many standard questions. Students are 



 

encouraged to explore these help pages. Begin your exploration from the URL: 
http://www.encs.concordia.ca/helpdesk/faq/faq.php 

 
Intellectual property: Content belonging to instructors shared in online courses, including, but not 
limited to, online lectures, course notes, and video recordings of classes remain the intellectual 
property of the faculty member. It may not be distributed, published, or broadcast, in whole or in part, 
without the express permission of the faculty member. Students are also forbidden to use their own 
means of recording any elements of an online class or lecture without the express permission of the 
instructor. Any unauthorized sharing of course content may constitute a breach of the Academic Code 
of Conduct and/or the Code of Rights and Responsibilities. As specified in the Policy on Intellectual 
Property, the University does not claim ownership or interest in any student IP. All university members 
retain copyright over their work. 
 

  

http://www.encs.concordia.ca/helpdesk/faq/faq.php


 

ON CAMPUS RESOURCES 
 

 

HEALTH SERVICES 

An on-campus health clinic and health promotion center with nurses and 
doctors. 

SGW 514-848-2424 ext. 3565 

LOY 514-848-2424 ext. 3575 

COUNSELLING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES 

Counsellors (licensed mental health professionals) work with students to 
address their mental health and wellbeing needs. 

SGW 514-848-2424 ext. 3545 

LOY 514 848-2424 ext. 3555 

ACCESS CENTRE FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES 

Supports students with a variety of disability conditions (including 
temporary disabilities arising from illness or injury). Students receive 
academic support for their educational experience at Concordia. 

acsdinfo@concordia.ca 514-848-2424 ext. 3525 

SEXUAL ASSAULT RESOURCE CENTRE 

Provides confidential and non-judgemental support and services to 
students, staff and faculty of all genders and orientations affected by 
sexual violence and/or harassment. 

Jennifer Drummond, Coordinator 

jennifer.drummond@concordia.ca sarc@concordia.ca 

514-848-2424 ext. 3353 

STUDENT SUCCESS CENTRE 

Support network from first-year to graduation. You’ll find one-on-one 
tutors, study groups, workshops as well as learning and career advisors 

514-848-2424, ext. 3921 

DEAN OF STUDENTS 

Supports students to enhance their Concordia experience by engaging 
in student life outside the classroom. 

Terry Kyle, Manager 

deanofstudents.office@concordia.ca SGW 514-848-2424 ext. 3517 

LOY 514-848-2424 ext. 4239 

ABORIGINAL STUDENT RESOURCE CENTRE 

An on-campus resource for First Nations, Métis and Inuit students that 
helps them make the most of the many resources available at the 
university. 

Orenda Konwawennotion Boucher-Curotte, Coordinator 

orenda.boucher@concordia.ca 514-848-2424 ext. 7327 

INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS OFFICE 

Supporting international students with immigration documents, health 
insurance, social events, and workshops. 

iso@concordia.ca 

514-848-2424 ext. 3515 

STUDENT ADVOCACY OFFICE 

Advocating for students facing charges under 

the Academic Code of Conduct or the Code of Rights and 
Responsibilities. 

studentadvocates@concordia.ca 514-848-2424, ext. 3992 

MULTI-FAITH & SPIRITUALITY CENTRE 

Provides a home for all those wishing to celebrate the human spirit in the 
widest sense of the word, through programs, events and a quiet space for 
reflection. 

Ellie Hummel, Coordinator 

mfsc@concordia.ca 

514-848-2424, ext. 3593 

CAMPUS SECURITY 

Ensures the safety of our members and campus property through 
prevention, surveillance, intervention, training, and education. Provides 
emergency medical services. 

security@concordia.ca 514-848-3717 

(dial 1 for urgent situations; dial 2 for non-urgent situations) 

CONCORDIA UNIVERSITY STUDENT PARENTS CENTRE 

An accessible space for student parents to study, share interests and 
develop a support network. 

Sumaiya Gangat, Coordinator 

cusp@concordia.ca 

514-848-2424, ext. 2431 

 

 
 
 
 

mailto:acsdinfo@concordia.ca
mailto:jennifer.drummond@concordia.ca
mailto:sarc@concordia.ca
mailto:deanofstudents.office@concordia.ca
mailto:orenda.boucher@concordia.ca
mailto:iso@concordia.ca
mailto:studentadvocates@concordia.ca
mailto:mfsc@concordia.ca
mailto:security@concordia.ca
mailto:cusp@concordia.ca


 

ACADEMIC HONESTY AND CODE OF CONDUCT  

Violation of the Academic Code of Conduct in any form will be severely dealt with. This includes 
copying (even with modifications) of program segments. You must demonstrate independent 
thought through your submitted work. The Academic Code of Conduct of Concordia University is 
available at:  
http://www.concordia.ca/students/academic-integrity/offences.html 
 
It is expected that during class discussions and in your written assignments you will communicate 
constructively and respectfully. Sexist, racist, homophobic, ageist, and ablest expressions will not be 
tolerated. 

 

ADDENDUM 
 

ACADEMIC CONDUCT ISSUES THAT APPLY IN GENERAL 
The basic ten rules that make you a good engineer 

 
The B. Eng. program is set to satisfy most of the requirements for your education and prepares you for a 

professional engineering career that requires dedication and knowledge. What you learn, and how you 
learn, will be used extensively in your engineering profession for the next 30 to 40 years. Therefore, the 
four years spent in the engineering program are crucial towards your professional formation. The first 
step is for you to learn to “think like an engineer” which means: 

 

• accept responsibility for your own learning  

• follow up on lecture material and homework  

• learn problem-solving skills, not just how to solve each specific homework problem  

• build a body of knowledge integrated throughout your program 

• behave responsibly, ethically and professionally 
 
One of the mainstays of being a professional engineer is a professional code of conduct and as an 

engineering student this starts with the Academic Code of Conduct (Article 16.3.14 of the undergraduate 
calendar). However, you may encounter situations that fall outside the norm and in such cases, you use 
your common sense. 

 
Further, the following issues should be given serious consideration: 
 
1) Attendance at lectures and tutorials are major learning opportunities and should not be missed. The 

labs represent a unique opportunity for you to acquire practical knowledge that you will need in your 
career. Class and tutorial attendance is important for you to comprehend the discipline and make the 
connections between engineering skills. You are strongly encouraged to participate in the class, ask 
questions and answer the instructor’s questions. Tutorials are just extensions of the classes in which 
application of the concepts presented during the lectures are presented and problems are practically 
solved. 

  
2) The decision to write tests that are not mandatory is entirely yours. For example, midterm test are 

often stated in many courses as optional. However, one the objectives of midterms is to check on your 

http://www.concordia.ca/students/academic-integrity/offences.html


 

comprehension of the material and allow time for whatever action is necessary (from more study time 
to discontinuing a course). Plan to attend the class tests even if they are not mandatory. If you pay 
attention in the lectures, it will take you significantly shorter time to comprehend the material. Note 
also that if you are in the unfortunate position of being unable to write a final exam due to medical 
reasons and seek a deferral, this may not be possible if the instructor has no information indicating that 
you have been attending the course and assimilating the material (ie through midterms, quizzes, 
assignments etc). 

 
3) Homework is usually mandatory and it has some weight in the final grade (such information is given 

in the course outline). Homework may also be conceived as training material for the class tests. Under 
all circumstances, it is highly recommended to carry out the home work on time and submit it on the 
prescribed date. Late submissions are not granted to individual cases regardless of the reason. This is 
part of the training for being in the workforce where deadlines have to be met. Please, plan your work 
such that you submit all the assignments and lab reports on time and in the correct place (not in the 
corridor or on the street!). 

 
4) Office hours with tutors, lab instructors or class instructors are listed in the course 

outline/website/office doors. Please respect these office hours and in case you have a serious conflict, 
contact the instructor asking for a special time arrangement. 

 
5) Class tests (assignments, quizzes) are returned to the student. The final exams are not. If you wish 

to see your exam paper, be aware that most instructors allow only a narrow window of time for that 
purpose. For the fall term, exams may usually be reviewed in January and May for the spring term. 

  
6) When you see your marked work (assignments, midterms, final exam etc), be aware that you are 

supposed to review your material and see the type of errors you made and if marks have been added 
incorrectly. This is not an opportunity to try and “negotiate” a higher grade with the instructor. If you 
believe that your grade is not right, you may apply for a formal Course Reevaluation through the Birks 
Student Centre. 

 
7) Writing tests and exams represents a major component of your course work. These tests and exams 

have rigorous requirements such as: 

• No cell phone or other communication enabling tool is allowed on the student during the examination 
period. 

• Only specified faculty calculators are allowed during tests and exams unless otherwise indicated by the 
instructor. 

• Usually, no materials are allowed in the exam unless otherwise announced. 
Get used to signing in and out of your exam. Make sure that you leave your exam papers with the 

invigilator. There are rules concerning general exam issues in the UG Calendar. These requirements are 
there to eliminate any possible misunderstanding and you are asked to respect the rules. Disciplinary 
measures are taken when the rules are not followed. 

  
8) Respect your colleagues and those that you meet during the class: tutors, instructors, lab 

instructors, technical personnel, assistants, etc. Use appropriate communication means and language. 
Be considerate for all human beings. This includes small things such as turning off cell-phones before a 
class begins. Concordia University is a very diverse group of people and a very large multicultural 
community. 



 

  
9) Communication is part of your future profession. Learn how to communicate effectively and 

efficiently in the shortest time possible. Write short but meaningful e-mails, make effective phone calls, 
etc. If your instructor accepts emails make sure that your request is clear with the course number and 
your name in the Subject line. Do not ask for special treatment as instructors have to treat all students 
equitably. 

 
10) Respect all the above and you will get closer to your future profession. 

 

 
 
 



